>> Hello, everyone.
Hello, Avery.
Welcome to the channel, soon to the podcast.
>> Thanks.
Glad to be here.
>> Yeah, happy to have you here.
So let's just go ahead and kick this off.
Avery, welcome to Talk Bythenomy.
>> Thanks so much.
I'm so excited to be here and be part of the show.
>> I'm excited to have you here as well.
>> One of the things that people reach out to me often is how do you get into data science?
How do you get into programming?
How do you get into Python?
I've been trying, or maybe they got a degree, or they took some training program, boot camp
or something.
And going from zero to one, I think, is the biggest career step you have to make.
That next job and the one after that, it only gets to be smaller steps, not bigger steps.
And it's really tough because that first big step, you're brand new at it.
You have no experience, right?
It's your first data science job or your first programming job.
And so hopefully we can give some folks out there a little bit of a hand up to help them
make that jump.
>> Yeah, totally.
I like to show this graphic that says it's a circle, and it's a circle of text.
And it says, "I can't get a job because I don't have experience because," and then it
restarts, "I can't get a job."
And that's the tricky part.
It's like, how do you get a data science job when you have no data science experience?
Because to get data science experience, that seems like you have to have a job as the prerequisite
and vice versa.
So it is very tricky.
So happy to chime in on that today.
>> Awesome.
Yeah, the industry can take it too far.
They can take it way too far.
So a few years ago, there was a really funny tweet that went around.
Back when they call them tweets, I don't know what they're called anymore.
Sebastian Ramirez, the guy who created FastAPI, saw a job posting.
When FastAPI was like a year and a half old, it said, "You must have four years of experience
with FastAPI to apply."
He said, "Hey, look, I'm the creator of FastAPI, and I'm unqualified for this job.
What kind of world are we living in?"
>> Yeah.
I don't want to live in that world, but that's unfortunately where we're at.
That's so tough.
And it's hilarious.
These job descriptions are getting out of hand, that's for sure.
>> Yeah.
Well, with AI, it's probably not going to get better.
We can talk about that more later.
Before we get into that, let's just jump in with a little bit of background on you before
we get to the topic.
Tell us a bit about yourself.
What do you do?
How did you get into Python?
Things like that.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
So I'm currently a data science consultant and also a data science instructor.
I run some online programs where I teach people to become data analysts, mostly, is what I'm
focused on.
But I also have this practice where I help companies solve data problems with different
techniques.
I started actually by studying chemical engineering in college in my undergraduate degree.
And about a semester in, I realized, "Crap, I hate this.
This is not for me."
But I was a little bit- >> Oh my gosh.
>> Do you agree?
Have you- >> Well, I did a semester of chemical engineering
as well.
I thought, "I love chemistry.
I love math.
Put them together."
Somehow, they don't go together.
It's like ice cream and eggs or something.
No, they don't go together, for me at least.
>> No, it wasn't good for me either.
I was just like, "Oh man, I'm actually not interested in refineries or manufacturing."
But I, like you, liked chemistry.
I liked math.
I thought this is perfect.
But I quickly realized, "Oh man, I really like this whole programming part that I get
to do in MATLAB at the time when I was an undergrad."
And I was on a time crunch to get through college quickly through eight semesters.
And the other issue I had was I didn't know what to do instead.
It was like, I don't really want to study computer science.
Part of the reason why is they can't have this weed out course at the beginning, which
you had to build Excel from scratch, basically, some sort of a spreadsheeting tool.
I was like, "Why would I rebuild something that already exists that I don't even like
using in the first place?"
I wasn't really into it.
So I didn't know what to do.
And luckily, I was working as a lab technician at this company, a really cool company that
makes these sensors that basically have the ability to smell.
So they can sniff what's in the air and it has applications for finding drugs or bombs
and airports and stuff like that.
And there was a data scientist on staff and that data scientist was awesome.
He was showing me all these cool algorithms he was writing for these sensors.
And then one day he got up and left and he left the company.
And we tried to hire another data scientist for six months, but they were really expensive.
We were a small company and none of them really wanted to move to Utah where I lived in Salt
Lake City.
And so we couldn't really find someone that would be able to do it.
And so finally I was like, "Well, I really like this programming stuff."
And the data scientist showed me a thing or two, maybe I could take a stab at this.
And I wrote my first machine learning algorithm and I was like, "Oh my gosh, I'm addicted
to this."
And then I never looked back and have been data science since, basically.
What a great story.
Yeah, I think a lot of people fall into programming that way.
And for some reason, not unexpectedly, but for some reason, a lot of people fall into
Python that way as well.
They're like, "You know, I have a job and I got this thing I got to do.
I just need a little bit more than maybe like an Excel spreadsheet or something."
And put it together and you're like, "Actually, this is cool."
After a while, like, "This is cooler than what I've been doing."
Or maybe I'll make it a good part of what I do, right?
Yeah, a hundred percent.
Even just making, it was in MATLAB, which is basically engineer's version of Python
or college version of Python 10 years ago, right?
I made like Tic-Tac-Toe.
And I remember playing Tic-Tac-Toe against the computer.
I think that's what it was, or maybe it was Hangman.
I can't remember.
But I remember the idea of being able to program games and play against the computer and I
built it.
I was like, "This is the coolest thing ever.
I got to do more of this."
Yeah, absolutely.
I've done some MATLAB too when I was younger and it's not that different from Python, but
it's, I think one of the big differences other than it just being embedded in a big expensive
app, is it's not a general purpose programming language, right?
You wouldn't go, "That was fun, but let me go build this website in MATLAB," or, "Let
me create Airbnb in MATLAB."
You just don't want to sort of, Azure has this self-prescribed limit to what you can
do with it.
Yeah.
I mean, that's one of the coolest parts about Python is it's really a Swiss army knife and
you can pretty much do, I don't want to say anything, but pretty close to anything in
Python, which makes it really neat.
And obviously one of the huge limitations of MATLAB is, one, it costs thousands of dollars,
but two, you're right.
It's not going to do cybersecurity for you.
It's not going to build websites.
But the syntax at the end of the day was really quick.
It was easy for me to transition from MATLAB to Python because the syntax isn't all that
different.
No, it's not all that different.
More math focused, but pretty similar.
I think maybe that's a good place to start discussing and exploring this topic of your
first data science job.
And I wouldn't necessarily plan on starting here, but let's start with before you even
necessarily know a programming language, right?
Maybe you've dabbled in MATLAB or you've dabbled in Excel or even dabbled in JavaScript or
something.
This thing we've been talking about with MATLAB and it applies to other areas as well, like
through programming languages per se, like Julia or something like that is how, if you
invest your time into learning one of these things really well, like how broadly industry
wide of a skill, high demand skill is that going to be, right?
You learn MATLAB, you put yourself in a box, you learn a more general programming language,
you kind of have more options afterwards, right?
Yeah, totally.
I think the more broad of a language you learn, the more useful you are to more industries
in general.
But I might take that even a step further and just say, learning MATLAB, not a whole
lot of companies use MATLAB, but just like landing your first data job, going from zero
to one is the hardest.
Learning your first language, zero to one is the hardest as well.
And then once you have that first language, the next language becomes so much easier.
So one of the first things I learned was MATLAB and then I moved to Python and that was easier.
And then I learned SQL and then I learned R and then I learned JavaScript.
And every time I added a new tool to my toolkit, it was quite, not what I want to say, it was
easy, but it got easier with each one.
I think that's true with foreign languages as well.
Once you learn one foreign language, then the third and the fourth become quite easy.
At least that's what I heard.
I speak kind of two and a half languages, but there's people who speak like seven and
they always say the sixth and the seventh become easier.
Yeah, you wonder how could you possibly, because learning the first one is so hard, first foreign
language, so you're like, well, how could you possibly take that on for this many languages?
And it's that it's not the same challenge each time, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
So I think when people are considering getting into data science, they really want to consider
what language they choose and where they go.
Like if you're coming out of a college program, you might feel like MATLAB or something like
that's real popular.
And yet that's because it's popular amongst professors who force their students to do
it.
That doesn't necessarily mean that's the broad worldview.
What do you think about R?
You know both.
Yeah, I like R. I sometimes troll R on LinkedIn.
So I guess that's another thing I should say is I post a lot on LinkedIn.
I'm kind of a LinkedIn guy.
And so a lot of the times, honestly, just for jokes and kicks and giggles, I'll kind
of roast R on LinkedIn just to get the trolls angry in the comments.
It's quite fun.
It's quite a fun experience.
But I'm not that big of a hater.
I definitely think R has its place.
The one thing that's really interesting about R versus Python is obviously a big debate
in the data science community is R is kind of that does one thing really well.
And it's getting a little less of that as more packages and libraries are added to R,
but R does the statistics and machine learning very well.
But obviously, I don't think once again, I don't know any websites, any super functioning
websites that are built on R. I don't know any cybersecurity that's really done very
well via R. So I think R does what it does well.
The syntax sometimes is a lot easier for people to go from Excel, which a lot of people are
more familiar with in the finance or banking world, for example.
The syntax in R is a little bit more similar to those Excel formulas than it is to Python.
So I think sometimes people have a little bit more success just because, "Oh, this
kind of feels like Excel formulas."
And so people really get there.
I think what you're kind of alluding to is if you're going to learn one skill, you might
as well learn the one skill that's applicable to the most, the widest net.
And so that way you're fishing in the biggest lake you possibly could versus in a smaller
pond of R. I think that's worth looking at.
And one of the things I actually really enjoy doing, because you mentioned, "Oh, you might
think MATLAB is popular because that's what the professors taught you."
And there's actually not a whole lot of data out there about, well, what should you learn?
So I don't know if you know who Luke Burrus is.
He's a data analyst YouTuber.
I was going to say YouTuber on YouTube, but that's kind of redundant, on YouTube.
And one of the things he's done is he's actually built this tool where he's web scraping thousands
of jobs, different data jobs every week, and then displaying and analyzing the skills required
for those jobs.
So it's actually like a data-driven way of saying, if you want to be a data scientist,
what skills should you actually be focusing on as you go, as opposed to just listening
to what a professor will say or what a LinkedIn influencer will say or what your bootcamp
will say.
Actually getting some data on, I think is pretty neat.
Yeah.
That is super cool.
And I'm not familiar with Luke, so we're going to dig him up and put him in the show notes
for later so people can check that out.
For sure.
Do you remember any of the trends he's recently talked about?
So yeah, it's datanerd.tech, I think is the website there.
And I look at it mostly for data analysts because that's who I work with the most.
So I know the data analyst data very well.
SQL is number one at 50%.
I think Python is number two at like 30%.
I think Python might've jumped it.
Well, this is for all data positions right here.
So the job title, you can choose.
Which one are you thinking I should pick here?
Data?
Maybe data scientist is the most applicable.
Data scientist, yeah.
Right.
Yeah, you're right.
Wow.
Oh, whoa, Python 69%.
Look at that.
Yeah.
So that's huge.
So that's even, what, 20% more than SQL, which a lot of people are like, if you want to be
a data scientist, you have to know SQL.
Well, if you look at the job descriptions, Python's mentioned a lot more.
So if you're brand new and you're going to learn one, you might as well start with Python
because that's probably the most in demand skill that there is right now for a data scientist.
Yeah.
And it's pretty easy, right?
It's not like, well, why don't you just learn C++ for embedded devices?
You're like, you know what?
Maybe I'll pick something else to start with.
Right.
But Python's pretty easy.
Yeah.
I think I agree with you.
I think Python's great.
I actually think, I think SQL is probably easier to learn if I'm being honest, because
really, especially for like data science stuff, it's only about like 20 commands that you
need to know in SQL.
But once again, SQL is a lot more, there's no websites built on SQL, I'll tell you that
much.
So it's a lot more limited on what it can do.
It's a skill, but not the language.
It's not enough on its own generally.
I mean, you can do reports and quite a bit with it, but you know, it's like when you
see these programming popularity, like what's the most popular language?
Oh, look, CSS is the third most popular.
That's not a language.
That's a thing that you use with other languages, right?
Use it with all the other languages.
That's why it's high up, but that doesn't mean it's high in demand.
Exactly.
It's just like table stakes, you know?
Yeah.
So you kind of got to distinguish table stakes from like picking an area, I think.
Well, I think that's totally true.
And really, I mean, I think Pythonistas could make the argument that there's really nothing
in SQL that you couldn't do in Python.
Now that's a little somewhat true depending on data size and stuff like that.
But regardless, there is ways that you can do most of the SQL commands in Python one
way or another.
Yeah.
It could be, when I first became a data scientist, I didn't even know SQL and I was doing SQL
commands or I was doing the aggregations or the where functions or the window functions
using Python.
So you definitely can, as long as your data is not like super big, then you'll totally
be fine.
Right.
So you can do things like generator or even slices or yeah, things like that.
List comprehensions, set comprehensions, all that kind of stuff.
It's kind of like, gosh, I really wish, really wish, a little bit of a sidebar, but I wish
list comprehensions and all those things had just a few more SQL features.
Right.
Like in a list comprehension, I say, give me this thing, maybe give me this property
of this class modified, like give me the user's name uppercased.
Right.
So that's like select and then for thing in collection, that's like from table or whatever.
And then you have the where clause with the if statement, but boy, wouldn't it be cool
to have like a sort also in there and other things like that, you know?
Oh, well, totally.
It's so close.
It is.
But the cool thing is, is if you want that sort, it's what one extra line.
Like it's not too bad.
So Python, I mean, I don't want to say this necessarily to hate all to make all the data
scientists and SQL lovers mad, but really Python can do a lot of the things that SQL
can.
That's for sure.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's for sure.
Probably the biggest, it's a bit of a diversion, but the biggest similarity to that I've seen
in the languages is C#'s link where they actually have almost all the query operators, including
joins and stuff like that built into the programming language.
I'd love to see more of that kind of inspiration into Python, but you know, that's all right.
It's still really good.
I've got a lot of cool SQL like features, but you're right.
Once you are no longer working with data memory or you want indexes, right?
Like this concept of indexes is not sufficiently well understood.
I think every time I hit a website that takes five seconds to load, I'm like, somebody is
not doing all the things they should be doing.
I just know it.
Yeah, that's totally true.
So what about SQL?
You know, let's talk about that for a bit, right?
The SQL, the query language for databases and other things.
There's ways to SQL query, not just relational databases, but you said you got away with
not quite learning that, but do you think if you could start over, maybe making an effort
to learn that would be really valuable?
Like how important is this a thing in the beginning of your career?
The interesting thing, you know, about landing a data job is your skills only plays, I say
a third of the role.
Your portfolio or the way that you portray your skills and your network, I think are
the other two thirds and are actually more important than your skills.
And that's kind of how I got away with not knowing SQL and not even being, to be honest,
that good at Python at the time was because I used my network to be in the situation to
get my lab technician job in the first place.
And then once again, I used that same network, in this case, my coworkers to land that first
data scientist position after we couldn't hire anyone.
And if I would have been applying externally for that role, chances are I wouldn't have
gotten that role.
I probably didn't know enough at the time to land that type of a role, but because they
knew I was hardworking, they knew I wasn't like a total idiot and I really liked to learn,
they took that chance on me.
And it paid off really well for them because at the time I was still in college and so
I wasn't getting paid that much and I was not getting paid like a data scientist, but
I was getting results like a data scientist for them.
So I think it paid off for both of us.
But I think if that was an external job and I applied for it, I probably didn't have enough
skills for it.
So I definitely think learning SQL, if you want to land a data science job, isn't a bad
place to start, especially because like I said, I mean, any programming language, I
like to think of like the iceberg, kind of like the Titanic, right?
There's the parts that you see and then there's the parts that you don't even know that are
there.
And really you could spend the rest of your life trying to master SQL or the rest of your
life trying to learn Python.
But the cool thing is, is a lot of the time you only need that top little bit that's sitting
at the top of the surface of the water to actually get stuff done.
And so for SQL, I think that's like 20 commands and I think you could learn it honestly in
like a month.
You could learn those 20 commands pretty easily.
But it worked out for me and I didn't have to use it that much at the time until I was
probably about almost three years into my job.
And I actually had switched jobs to a bigger company.
The other thing that I was working for a smaller company where we didn't have a ton of data,
so we could use CSVs kind of as our database, which is not great practice.
But when I eventually became a data scientist at ExxonMobil, I was going to say they didn't
use Excel as a database, but they still did.
But the point is they had much larger SQL databases with hundreds of thousands, actually
millions of rows of data.
Yeah.
Then you got to be really, you need to understand it at a much deeper level.
You're like, if you do a query like this, it's going to be super slow.
But if you do it like that, it can use the composite index for the sort and then blah,
blah, blah, blah.
Right.
Then yeah.
You're getting to the bottom of the iceberg in SQL or maybe not the bottom, maybe like
the middle chunk under the water, but there's so much to learn for both of them.
Yeah, absolutely.
So Amira, the audience asks, when you talk data job, what kind of jobs are out there?
So we talked both about how we did chemical engineering and then we saw chemical factories
like, yeah, I don't really want to work here anymore.
I'm out.
So thinking about like, well, what are the kinds of jobs you do?
I think that's really important because it's easy to get focused in on like the FANG companies.
Like I want to work for like some super big tech company.
I want to move to San Francisco and like that, that, that, right.
Like, you know what?
There's not just plenty of other jobs, but the opportunities, just like you described
and as well as my first job, I worked at a company that had like eight people.
And it was awesome.
Right.
They didn't expect me to be, you know, running Kubernetes clusters and doing all sorts of
crazy.
They're just like, I need you to make this thing happen.
Can you do like, I'm pretty new, but that thing I can make that happen.
Like let's go.
Right.
And I feel like the possibilities to get in, especially with these maybe more niche
type of industries and companies might even be easier for a first job.
People seem to be really obsessed with, with the FANG.
And I don't know if that's like a societal thing or if it's just, those are the companies
that we use a lot.
And so we're excited about them, but yeah, there's so many more data jobs outside of
FANG than there are inside of FANG, even though there's, there's quite a bit inside of FANG.
And oftentimes those roles can be much more interesting and you can do a lot bigger of
an impact.
When, when I was working at this small company, VaporSense, I like, I had so much power.
I didn't even realize it.
I had such a big effect on the company.
I was presenting to, you know, fortune 500 companies and what I did really made a difference.
And when it came to the point where ExxonMobil offered me to go be a data scientist for Exxon,
I said, Oh, I want to go work for the big company with the nice desk and the nice laptop
and you know, try something new.
And when I got there, I really, I mean, I had some pretty cool opportunities when I
was at ExxonMobil, but ultimately I left pretty shortly after two years of being there because
I just felt like a cog in the machine and I didn't feel like I was actually making a
difference and that was really important to my work satisfaction of like, is what I'm
doing being used?
Is it being used to better the world?
Do I feel valued?
And the answer was kind of no for me when I was there.
So there's definitely a trade-off between the small companies and the big companies,
but also to go back to your original question, there are so many freaking roles in the data
world that you're not even thinking of that, like I'm not even thinking of.
I saw a new one the other day when I was helping one of my students, it was like, it wasn't
data janitor, but it was something like that where I was like, I don't even know what that
role is, but there's so many roles.
When I was a data scientist at VaporSense, the small company, my actual title was junior
chemo-matrician, which basically means you're doing data science with chemistry.
When I was at ExxonMobil, when I was first there, I was doing data science, but my actual
title was optimization engineer.
And so there's so many titles that we don't even think to search of, or even to look up,
but those are all data science roles.
I was doing machine learning every day in both those roles, and you would maybe never
guess from those titles.
Yeah, you would never guess.
No, that's awesome.
What machine learning libraries, frameworks were using?
Let's see.
So at VaporSense, once again, because it's a smaller company, I had a lot more say in
what I was doing.
So we were building a bunch of machine, we were building classification models to basically
take the data from our sensors and sniff if something was in the air.
Sometimes that was a yes, no, like, oh yes, there is ammonia in the semiconductor factory
and that's bad.
So that's a yes classification kind of binary, right?
Other times it was, what drug is this?
Is this meth or is this heroin?
One of the use cases we had was, this is binary once again, but is this recreational marijuana
or medicinal marijuana?
And can we tell the difference between those?
So we were usually using classification models, usually built in scikit-learn in Python the
majority of the time there.
When I was at Exxon, we had a lot less say, like the data scientists had a lot less say
in the decision making process.
We were doing a lot of multivariate linear regression with a lot of crazy hacks and transformations
kind of in the meantime for one of my positions there.
And then the other time, the other position I did there, we were doing a lot of auto ML
using PyCaret and letting it kind of decide what type of models to do.
So lots of models-
- Okay, unsupervised learning type stuff, huh?
- Yeah, it was awesome.
It was really fun to...
I love PyCaret 'cause it's like, okay, go make 25 models and tell me which one's the
best.
It's like, makes my job easy, I guess.
- We're gonna be creative with sheer numbers.
That's how we're gonna come up with a solution.
Got it.
- Exactly.
- Cool.
Diego is asking like, what are some of the common stats methods as in mathematical type
stuff you would use?
So one of the things I know that some people getting into programming think is you gotta
be really good at math to be a programmer.
And I think you gotta be really good at logical thinking, but you need to almost zero math
to be like a web developer.
We're talking percents for CSS, incrementing numbers from one to two to two to three for
IDs and stuff like that.
But for data science, maybe there's a little bit more.
Where do you see that kind of background?
- I think, yeah, I like what you said.
You have to think logically, but maybe the math isn't as important.
And I think it's actually somewhat similar in data science.
I will say you probably need a little bit more math than a web developer, but I think
it's a lot less than most people think.
And it's probably less about being able to do the math and maybe more about understanding
the mathematical concepts.
And what I mean by that is a lot of, so I also have a master's degree in data analytics.
A lot of master's degrees in data science and data analytics will say you need calculus
and linear algebra as kind of a background for your math.
And that kind of stops people.
I don't want to do any calculus.
I don't want to do any linear algebra.
And while both those concepts do exist in data science principles, the majority of the
time the computer, Python, is doing the math.
You just have to be able to interpret the results of the math and kind of know what
different directions, like if this is going down with an optimization problem, okay, that's
the derivative getting closer to zero.
It's really less about knowing how to do the math by hand and more just understanding what
the math, the computer is actually doing.
So I think it's actually a lot easier than most people say.
That being said, knowing how to do a derivative or take an integral, those concepts I think
is probably underlying pretty important.
But other than that, a lot of the times I'm doing linear regression because it's awesome.
It gets the job done.
A lot of the time I'm doing hypothesis testing and statistics, which you have to look like
at a P-score.
Nothing all that crazy.
At Exxon, I had to do a lot of linear programming, but that's honestly, that's like the exception
versus the rule.
There's not a whole lot of linear programming for most data scientists.
So I really don't think the math is all that hard.
Now of course, that's coming from someone who got a chemical engineering degree, who
had to take all the calculus, all the linear algebra.
So I did go through those courses.
I haven't really done it from scratch from like a lot of my students are teachers, for
example, who never took those courses in college.
So I can't speak from that perspective, but a lot of my students are able to figure it
out at the end of the day and transfer.
So it happens.
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
I think you make a good point.
I think it's about knowing, okay, this formula or this algorithm or this test means this
thing.
It applies in this situation.
It doesn't apply in that situation.
Here's what you're trying to get from it, right?
Like I know I need to do a fast Fourier transform.
So, and this is what it tells me when I get out the other side, but do I need to be able
to sit down and recreate the integral and the calculus behind it and do that on like
a home, like as a homework example, and I give me a function and I'll do the Fourier
transform and I'll actually do the symbolic integration.
Like, no, you probably don't need that.
Right.
But you need to know I do the Fourier transform in this situation and this is why.
And then I just say, call the function, do it right.
And interpret the results.
Really that's what being a data scientist is all about is, yeah.
What does, what does the business use case, what's the desired business use case?
How do I relate that use case to the data?
What technique can I use to get the outcome that I need?
Computer go do it, interpret results, present to stakeholders.
That's a data scientist.
I think one of the challenges with that, it's going to be not that it's not good, but I
think it's going to be challenging because how do you learn when to use a certain statistical
test or when to do some kind of funky transformation, like a Fourier transform without more traditional
mathematical backgrounds and all the academics will not just go, Oh, we're just going to
give you like five minute overview and they'll help you understand.
They're like, Nope, we're going to start with this axiom or this theorem from differential
equations.
I'm going to work up.
You're like, no, no, no, no, no.
I really, I don't need that.
I don't, I'm not on a four year plan.
I'm on a four week plan.
How do I, how do I get value from a couple of the mathematical things without being sucked
into like, yeah, now I'm in differential equations at Harvard online and I don't understand how
I got there.
It's such a big problem and I'm so glad you brought this up.
And I'll be, I'll be vulnerable because yeah, I felt the same, the same way.
And I was like, there has to be a better way.
And so about, what was it?
Three years ago now, two and a half years ago, three years ago, I said, Oh my gosh,
I'm going to solve this problem and I'm going to start my own data science bootcamp.
And so I spent about six months making the curriculum, making all the videos.
I opened it up, I got some students in there and I ran it for about six months and I looked
at the results and man, we weren't getting anyone into data science jobs.
And I thought, Oh, what the heck am I doing wrong?
I had this brilliant idea of like, we're going to be less theory, more project, more hands
on.
And I realized, man, the truth is people just learn better at work.
That's where you learn that whole technique that you just like, how did someone learn
that?
The answer is by getting experience and learning it at work.
And when I looked back and I said, okay, well we have had students get jobs.
What jobs did they get?
And it turns out most of them were getting like business intelligence, intelligence engineer
jobs or data analysts or financial analyst jobs that were a little bit below a data scientist
job.
And I realized, Oh man, if we can just help people go from zero to one and get their foot
in the door, they can go from one to five much quicker at work because work is just,
I don't know, it's this magical place where like you said, whatever you were working at
earlier and they're like, Hey, can you do this Kubernetes thing?
They just kind of throw you in the fire and you're like, figure it out.
And that's somehow you do.
I don't know what it is about work, but you figure it out and that's where you learn.
So that's kind of what I've, why I changed my curriculum to be more focused on, you know,
okay, maybe people aren't going to become data scientists, but can we get them to zero
to one quickly and then they can get paid to learn the rest of the data science stuff
when they're actually in that first position.
Yeah.
Well, how much do you know about what you actually want to do in the industry before
you've done it as well?
Right?
I mean, I used to be like, Oh, I thought everybody said machine learning was awesome.
And I've used chat GP, she PT and I loved it, but it turns out actually like API is
better, but I've never had a chance to build an API.
So until I started, I didn't even learn that one, it was a thing too, that it was cool
or vice versa, right?
Whatever.
But until you get kind of in, you don't even know, like, actually this part is where I
really am enjoying it.
And so just getting that first step, that's a big deal.
A hundred percent.
It's, you don't know what you don't know until you know it.
And that's why, I mean, really when it comes to, if we go back to just SQL or just Python,
you could spend, I tell people this, if you tried to master Python before you applied
to a job, you'd be like 80 years old before you ever applied to a job.
Same with SQL, same with machine learning.
The cool thing about data is we're never going to know it all.
And so just learn the bare minimum to get your foot in the door.
And then you have this place where you're going to get paid to learn what you want to
learn eventually.
If you learn, Oh, I love APIs.
I promise you that there's a company out there that will hire you and you can learn APIs
on the job.
Like that's going to happen.
But that first step.
There's a company out there that it doesn't know it needs APIs, right?
But you can help them and they don't have huge expectations because this is the thing
they just learned they needed.
Right?
A hundred percent.
Yeah.
It's wild.
Right.
All right.
So that's a really cool place.
I mean, I know you talked about being connected on LinkedIn pretty well and certainly having
some kind of social network support and maybe it's not that you would call it not social,
but a real world network of actual human beings that you're physically know somehow.
What's that?
I don't know what that is.
I know.
We gave that up back in 2020 I thought.
Anyway, there was some stat that I saw somewhere that over half of the jobs are filled with
people before it even becomes a job posting.
Right?
Maybe some of the best ones is like, Hey, who knows somebody who can do this?
We need some like your data science example, a data scientist example.
They quit like, Oh, we need somebody.
Anybody know a good data scientist?
I don't want to just go put it out on the open job market and have to have a hundred
interviews and who knows what I'm going to get.
Like if you can recommend somebody, let's start there.
Right?
So being in that group to be recommended, it's important.
It's, it's the key.
There was a really interesting survey done on LinkedIn and they said it was kind of,
it was done by the same person and Jordan Nelson, by the way.
He said, how do you approach getting a job?
And then the next day he said, how did you get your last job?
And 80% of people, they use what I call the spray and pray method, which basically means
you go and you apply to as many jobs as you possibly can and hope for the best cross your
fingers.
That was 80% of what people were doing.
And then on the next poll the next day, it was a total, I think of what, 70% were either
headhunted recruited or referred.
And so it's like the parental principle here where, you know, 80% of the effort is only
getting you 20% of the results and really 20% of the effort gets 80% of the results.
So it's okay.
We know networking and getting recruited is really important, but how do we do it?
It's easier said than done.
Right.
I'm not in the industry.
How do I make friends who are right?
It's like, well, my neighbors don't do it.
So I guess I'm out.
That's the tricky thing is, yeah, if you're not in the industry yet, how do you get recruited
into it or how do you know someone?
And what I've come to learn is it actually doesn't even matter.
So like for instance, let's take your neighbor, right?
Your neighbor is probably not a data scientist.
Maybe you're lucky and they are, and they can refer you to a company.
But what's really cool is I've learned that companies really come to trust their employees
and their employees' recommendations.
And so even if your neighbor, let's say is a web developer or maybe even less technical,
let's just say your recruiter is in finance, right?
And if there's an opening, like a data science opening at that company, a lot of the times
they will actually take their employee referrals much more seriously than any sort of cold
application that they get.
And so a lot of the times I've had students who just know someone that works at the company.
They saw a job opening pop up.
Very quickly they messaged their friends, "Hey, do you know a recruiter or a hiring
manager?
I could talk more about this role.
Could you do an internal referral for me?"
And they were able to land jobs that they probably wouldn't have.
No, they definitely wouldn't have without that internal referral.
So it is tricky.
It's the old cliche.
It's not what you know, it's who you know.
Sure.
I think there's still plenty of ways, COVID notwithstanding.
I think that these days there's plenty of ways to get those connections, right?
But maybe people don't know, like meetup.com is really good.
If you live in a non-tiny city, right?
There's many, many things going on around data science, around Python, around other
data engineering, whatever, right?
You could go to those things.
They're typically even free.
Often they are free with food.
They even feed you, right?
And make connections or regional conferences or national conferences, right?
Like we probably, many people have heard of PyCon, right?
There's US PyCon, there's EuroPython, and then there's, but that's, those are the ones
that are loft and talked about, but there's 10, 20 little smaller regional ones in the
US and many more that I'm not aware of throughout the world.
There's probably one of those within driving distance, right?
That you could go to make connections and just also kind of take the temperature of
actually what you see on the internet versus what you see and actually talking to real
people.
So I'd also say just get out there.
A hundred percent.
Those places have the people who probably want to hire you because they're local, right?
Which is one thing that's trouble on LinkedIn.
I'm big on networking on LinkedIn, but a lot of the times you're going to be networking
the people who in all likelihood might never have a role that's even open to you.
But the people that you're like, for instance, we have, I'm in Utah and we have Silicon Slopes
that has like a tech meetup.
We have a local Python meetup chapter.
We have the big data and developers conference that's free every year with tons of food.
And the people who go there are people from companies around there that have the openings
that you're trying to find and they want to hire people like you who are in the area.
So at least you can maybe come to the office once a week or maybe once a month or whatever.
And so really, like you said, going to those meetups, it's tough because networking is
always difficult either online or in person.
But at least in those situations, you know, hey, these are people that are tied to real
companies that exist around me that do make data hires.
So I have a chance.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's definitely a much higher chance than just shooting out a resume.
All right.
Let's see.
We talked about job hunting already.
What about like applications and resumes?
What are your thoughts on that?
I think once again with the applications, the more targeted that you can make it, the
better.
Right.
So if you can really hone in on I really want this job, I'm going to cold message five people
at this company and see if I can get that internal referral one way or another, make
a real connection with them.
I think that's really key.
And with resumes, resumes are more of an art than they are a science.
I feel like they are so difficult to figure out.
And these ATSs that are trying to match you and see if you're a good fit.
I've tried a lot of them and a lot of them suck.
Like whoever's whoever's the data scientist behind those.
We need to have a conversation with them because it's it's a little tricky sometimes.
But one of the coolest concepts I've been introduced to recently, and I have a whole
episode on my podcast about it, is A/B testing your resume.
And basically the idea is a resume job is just to get you a screener interview or or
like a beginner interview, basically.
It's all an interview.
Like no one's seeing a resume and then hiring you.
They're always going to interview.
So if you think about it, a resume's job, the only job it has is to convince someone
to get on the phone and talk to you.
And it's just a piece of paper.
And guess what?
You can put whatever you want on that piece of paper.
Now I'm not saying to lie, but I'm just saying you could theoretically make a perfect resume
for whatever job you're trying to go for and send it out there and see what happens.
But I'm not saying to do that.
I'm not saying to lie.
My point in saying this is that the resume is just to get you the interview.
And if you're not getting interviews, something's probably wrong with your resume.
And so, you know, tweak something, apply to 10 more jobs, see what happens.
Tweak something, apply to 10 more jobs, see what happens.
Until you finally have the right combination of skills, of experiences, of different keywords.
Because a lot of the time you're just trying to beat the ATS.
And that's the sad part about it, is it's like, how do I prove to this random computer
algorithm that they should talk to me on the phone?
That's a hard game to beat.
And there's a whole bunch of advice from all these different people.
What I've come to learn is it's different for every company.
It's different for every person.
You kind of a numbers game until you get lucky and you figure it out.
Yeah.
That's good advice.
I guess two thoughts.
One is I know that, not speaking specifically to anyone, but in general, women wait until
they match all the requirements of a position where a guy's like, I know three of those
things.
I'm taking a flyer, I'm sending it.
I would just like to encourage the women out there to just send it as well.
Totally.
I think if you, I 100% agree with that.
And I think if you reach 60% of the requirements, I think you have a chance.
A lot of the times those are wishlists and not actual requirements.
And depending on are you local to the area?
Do you have a domain experience in this company?
There's lots of other factors.
What about contributing to open source or having GitHub repos that can be projects that
you can show off?
What's your advice there?
Oh, I'm a huge proponent of projects in a portfolio.
I think if you don't have experience with something, you create your own by building
a project.
And if you can do that with open source, I think you should totally do that because I've
benefited so much from open source.
I have not given back as much as I should to open source development and projects.
I definitely should do that.
But if you can find a project that you're passionate about, that you can help with,
I think you should totally do that.
Even if it's not open source and you're just building a project to showcase your skills,
I'm all about that.
I think you can do projects that are super fun, maybe that are good for your community
or good for your life.
I'm a huge fan of personal projects.
I've put a Fitbit on my dog before and looked at her steps.
I've found the healthiest meal at McDonald's.
I've visualized my weight over time and tried to create different forecasting models and
stuff like that.
There's so much data in our lives that you can use to make really cool projects.
Oh, absolutely.
You talked about, okay, you get your first job and that's where you really learn.
But if you don't have your first job, you can effectively simulate that.
Say, I would have gone to a job and been given a project to analyze something.
I'm just interested in this thing.
I've got two hours a day until I get a job that I can be inspired about this and just
get going on it.
Maybe create a website and publish your results and it can draw more people in to actually
see that and start to appreciate it.
You could even ask, "Who's behind this cool project?
Maybe I want them to come work for me."
Little do they know you're doing all this work because you got some spare time and you're
trying to build up your experience and self-guided study.
Yeah.
If you can build a cool project and flip the job hunt where you're not applying for jobs,
but jobs start to apply for you, you're in such a good position.
Doing really cool projects can help you get there.
Now, it's hard to do cool projects.
It's hard to publish projects, which is one of the things that people really struggle
with.
For all you Python listeners out there, let me just tell you, Streamlit is absolutely
amazing because it makes the deployment process so easy.
It's free.
It's a little tricky to deploy at first, but compared to what you used to have to do back
in the day, I'm saying back in the day, like four years ago, basically.
It was really hard to deploy something where you could send someone a URL, "Hey, check
out my web application, machine learning application."
But Streamlit is such a cool app that makes it so easy and so intuitive to make these
cool little apps that you could just put on your resume, put on your portfolio, send to
recruiters.
I'm such a fan of the Streamlit app.
I love it.
Yeah.
It's super cool.
There's a couple of those and Streamlit's definitely one of the really nice ones there.
They host it.
There's some hosting behind Streamlit as well these days, right?
You don't even have to set up a server or anything.
You just create it and put it up there.
That's what I'm saying.
Back in the day, I used Dash a lot.
I'm still a big fan of Dash.
Dash is more customizable than Streamlit and can do quite a bit more, but it's a lot more
work to deploy it.
It's more like programming.
Yeah, it is a lot more programming.
And the UI rather than just the behind the scenes.
You have to do both.
You have to know a little bit about systems and data engineering and stuff like that,
versus Streamlit kind of abstracts that away.
But yeah, back in the day, I used to make Dash web applications and deploy them on Heroku
back when they had a free tier of hosting and they've taken that away.
So I don't even know what the go-to free hosting platform is nowadays.
I moved most of my things to Streamlit and it's so nice.
Yeah, we got Shiny for Python now, which is also nice.
I haven't checked that out.
I haven't done too much with it either, but Joe and the team over there are doing pretty
cool stuff, like adding more dynamic interactive stuff to Jupyter, like running inside Jupyter
and things.
Yeah, pretty cool.
I'll have to check it out.
Yeah.
I think they also do a bunch of hosting stuff over there as well, which is why it came to
mind.
All right.
Yeah, what other advice you got for folks out there?
So AI, is AI not studying AI or learning to use AI machine learning, but is there a benefit
of trying to use ChatGPT to help you get this job or is there a danger?
Like I'm thinking, for example, like have a ChatGPT write me an awesome resume.
And then the tools are like, well, we've detected this is AI generated and it's out.
You know what I mean?
Like what do you see happening there?
I think a lot of people see AI as like an all or nothing tool as in it's either you,
the human doing the work or it's the AI doing the work.
But whenever, I don't know about you, but whenever I'm using ChatGPT for anything,
it's very rare it's copy and paste for me or at least not iterative where I'm doing
multiple prompts, prompt after prompt, after prompt, trying to tweak it exactly what I
want.
And so the way I look at ChatGPT and other gen AI that will be coming out, it's only
inevitable, is instead of looking at does this replace me?
Does this, you know, like for instance, am I going to build my whole resume using chat
GPT?
Am I going to build, can ChatGPT build, you know, take a data scientist's job and build
the whole model for them?
I like to see it more as like a hammer.
It's like a tool for the data scientist or a tool for the job searcher to use in conjunction
with your screwdriver or anything else.
It's like something to be wielded by human, not replaced for the human, if that makes
sense.
Right.
You know, it's really good for stuff like, Hey, here's, I know a regular expression will
do this.
The last time I studied, I completely forgot what this is about and I know it's gnarly,
but if I just ask, here's an example, here's what I want.
And traditionally what you would end up doing is you'd be on stack overflow.
Yeah.
You'd be all over the internet.
You'd be trying to piece it together from external information anyway.
And so code is something that's a little bit more in the wheelhouse of the generative AI
because it can't really make it up as much.
I know it could like do something insecure and you didn't know it was or whatever, but
it's not like asking for legal advice where it makes up cases that didn't exist.
Like it gives you code, you put it in the runtime or the compiler and it runs or it
doesn't work.
Yeah.
So it's, it's pretty, pretty effective for that.
But yeah, for resumes, I would be more like, let me ask it, what are the in demand things?
And if I know these three skills, what other skills should I know to get a, you could sort
of use it in an explorative way to then come up with what you might write for yourself.
Right.
Something like this.
Yeah.
And I find it really useful for brainstorming like action verbs on your resume bullets.
Like I think it's really good at that.
What's 10 different ways to say lead.
So I don't say lead five times on my resume and I use some different action bullets.
I think it's great at that.
I personally, it's pretty rare that I start any Python code from scratch nowadays.
I'm either starting hopefully from a template that I've already written or I'm starting
from a ChatGPT.
Like this is what I kind of want to accomplish, right?
Like the outline for it.
Like one of the things I hate doing is I make a lot of streamlet apps.
I probably make a streamlet app a month right now.
And I hate starting from scratch with streamlet.
It's super easy to start from scratch, but I'll say, Hey, ChatGPT.
I want to build a streamlet app.
This is like the component I want here.
This is the component I want here.
And it's almost like a warmup for me as a programmer and it will create, it'll create
something that works.
It's not what I want.
And I spend the next five hours trying to make it what I want, you know, without chat
GPT, but it kind of gives me a warm start to my programming process.
So I really like it.
I think it's something that everyone should use.
And I think if you're thinking about getting into any sort of programming, you know, whether
it's data science or, or web development, I think you should be a little bit less worried
about it taking your job and job security.
I think you should almost be more excited that, wow, the bar has never been lower to
break into tech.
Like this is, this is a step up gift from the programming gods that I get to use to
break in the deck.
Another thing to keep in mind is I imagine a lot of people listening to this podcast
are not just starting a college program, right?
They're coming from possibly other experiences, other specialties.
You know, what's really good for job security, knowing the intersection of two things, the
intersection of chemistry and programming, the intersection of geology and programming
for Exxon potentially, right?
Yes, those things take you from a pool of a thousand to a pool of tens.
And so what's awesome about that is it means two things.
You don't throw away if you got a degree in something else like biology or whatever, you
don't throw away like, well, that was wasted four years.
That's out.
Yes.
And it, it slices the pool of people who could apply for certain jobs way, way smaller.
Right.
Sounds like you agree.
Oh, a thousand percent.
I'll just tell a quick little anecdote.
When I was at ExxonMobil, there's a lot of not things, things I did not like in ExxonMobil,
but this is something I really liked is about once a quarter, they would do a crowdsourced
data science competition for the whole organization, like around the entire world.
And they would say, this is a business problem we're trying to solve, you know, and at Exxon,
we have data scientists all over the world and like all sorts of different teams and
things like that.
So I like did not know all the data scientists at Exxon and they'd say, this is, this is
the problem we're facing.
Here's the data, go.
Right.
Nice.
And I loved participating in these.
It was like right up my, my wheelhouse of like, I really enjoy exploration and all this
stuff.
At the time I was getting my master's degree, but I didn't have my master's degree and I
was competing against, so I'm just a chemical engineering grad, right.
And I'm competing against people with PhDs in computer science and in data science and
all these like people who have way more experience than me.
And I actually won a few competitions.
That's awesome.
I appreciate it.
And it's not because I was a better programmer or a better, better data scientist.
It's because I majored in chemical engineering and I knew the business problem, the domain
extremely well.
And I kind of knew the programming and the data science stuff, but the combination of
them made me very valuable.
Like one of the best examples I have is we were looking at crude oil properties.
And I remember like there was a forum where you'd like ask your questions.
And one of the, one of the data scientists asked, Hey, is sulfur bad?
There's lots of sulfur in this.
Is it bad?
And like to a chemical engineer, that's like the most obvious thing.
No, you, yes.
Sulfur is very bad in crude oil.
That's very no, no.
That's like such a fundamental thing to me and to him or her that was like groundbreaking.
And so yeah, your domain can become your superpower in your career.
Yeah.
And it makes it way harder for chat, GPT and other types of tools to just automate you
out of a job.
Right.
Yeah.
Because you bring in all these skills together, which is awesome, but it also makes it easier
for you to get the job.
It makes it easier for you to continue your momentum of whatever you've been up to.
It's just, it's good all around.
Yeah.
I think it's more fun too, because once again, like when I was trying to decide if I should
study computer science, I was like, man, I don't really want to build a, an Excel workbook
for building an Excel workbook sake.
And that's still true for me today.
I don't want to do data science for data science sake.
I only like machine learning or data science when I'm doing it to solve a really fun problem
I'm passionate about.
That's, that's why it's more fun.
So if you can be excited about the domain and excited about the algorithms, I think
that's, that's a great place to be.
Absolutely agree.
All right.
Well, we're running short on time, but maybe tell us a bit about your data career jump
start.
Yeah, absolutely.
You've referred to it a couple of times.
Yeah.
So yeah, I have a company called Data Career Jumpstart.
I just try to do a lot of education.
So the education happens on LinkedIn, happens on YouTube.
And I actually forgot to mention this at the beginning, but I have my own podcast called
the Data Career Podcast, where I help people land their first day to job.
We're about at a hundred episodes.
So not quite the groundwork that you've put in.
That's still a ton.
That's awesome.
Yeah, we're, we're getting there.
And then, yeah, I also have a, a, a bootcamp where I try to affordably help people land
their first data analyst position by teaching them the skills, the networking and the project
and portfolio building that they need to do so.
Like the long version of this show.
Yeah, basically.
Well, yeah, just take, take what we talked about today, expand on it, make it like 350
unique lessons, and that's exactly what it is.
Yeah, very cool.
All right.
Well, we're about out of time.
So maybe just every final, final call to action, you know, people, maybe you're inspired.
See Diego out in the audience said awesome talk very much.
So what's next?
It's easy to be inspired, but you got to take action.
Yeah, I love that.
I think it's always fun to listen to podcasts, but you probably benefit way more from the
action you take after a podcast.
So for you guys who are maybe interested in a data analytics or a data science career,
explore that if you're like, yes, I'm in, you know, make a plan, make a roadmap.
If you need help, I have like a webinar that will help you make a roadmap.
Like what skills should you learn?
How should you be networking and stuff like that?
But really probably if you're just getting started trying to figure out what skills you
should learn, like what are the top skills that you should be learning and then learning
those skills and then not only learning those skills, but take action and learning and build
some sort of a project that we talked about that you could put on a portfolio, make a
streamlet app or something like that.
That's probably the best action you could possibly take.
If you need any ideas, advice, feel free to check out my website, datacareerjumpstart.com
or the podcast data career podcast.
Hopefully there's a lots of free resources for you guys to check that out.
If you've never seen streamlet before, I have some YouTube videos about streamlet that you
guys can check out, but I love it.
Just take action somehow, do something.
Yes.
That's one of the huge, huge differentiators is like you might be inspired, but you just
got to start taking those steps and it becomes a snowball.
So thanks for sharing all your experience and your advice.
Hopefully some people out there are taking action and yeah, I'll put everything we talked
about in the show notes of course.
So thanks for being here Avery.
Yeah, thank you.
Thanks for having me.
I appreciate it.
You bet.